# When do I use `Enum` vs `for .. end` comprehensions?

## TL-DR

Use `Enum` functions when piping `|>` and `for .. end` comprehensions when "just" needing
a quick loop.

## Post

Brooklin Myers of DockYard is creating course material for the Elixir language:
[DockYard Academy](https://dockyard.com/blog/2022/07/26/what-to-expect-from-the-dockyard-academy-q-a-with-instructor-brooklin-myers).

In the lesson on comprehensions, it was asked -- naturally -- when and why one would
prefer an `Enum` function over a comprehension.


In the deployment and use of the *beta* curriculum, there was a question about the
goodness of using `&` operator as a shortcut for creating anonymous functions.

The concern boils down to questioning the **readability**:

```elixir
Interactive Elixir (1.14.0) - press Ctrl+C to exit (type h() ENTER for help)
iex(1)> (fn x -> x + 1 end).(10)
11
iex(2)> (& &1 + 1).(10)
11
```

### Facts

Lets start with some facts about the `&` operator, with references:

* **Getting Started** guide on [Function capturing](https://elixir-lang.org/getting-started/modules-and-functions.html#function-capturing)
* **`&expr`** description in [`Kernel.SpecialForms.html#&/1`](https://hexdocs.pm/elixir/Kernel.SpecialForms.html#&/1)

#### Syntax

The major difference between the 2 syntax is that `&` creates an anonymous
function comprised of only one expression, whereas `fn .. end` allows for a
body of technically unlimited expressions.

Example:

```elixir
iex(1)> many_exprs_fn = fn a ->
...(1)>   IO.puts("a: #{a}")
...(1)>   IO.puts("a+1: #{a+1}")
...(1)>   IO.puts("a+2: #{a+2}")
...(1)> end
#Function<42.3316493/1 in :erl_eval.expr/6>
iex(2)> many_exprs_fn.(4)
a: 4
a+1: 5
a+2: 6
:ok

iex(1)> many_exprs_capture = &(
...(1)>   IO.puts("a: #{a}")
...(1)>   IO.puts("a+1: #{a+1}")
...(1)>   IO.puts("a+2: #{a+2}")
...(1)> )
** (CompileError) iex:1: block expressions are not allowed inside the capture operator &, got: IO.puts("a: #{a}")
IO.puts("a+1: #{a + 1}")
IO.puts("a+2: #{a + 2}")
```

Thus, `&` is constrained to only a single expression.

#### Empirical

Your author could offer their opinions -- and will at the end -- but it is
also illustrative to examine how it is actually being used, and especially
in code from (Elixir) experts.

Here we will search over the source for Elixir (itself!) and the popular
applications Phoenix & Livebook.

We will obtain source for these and search over them with this `ripgrep`
regex:

> `rg -i --pcre2 'Enum\.\w+\(&(?![^/]+/\d\))'`

Which will search for uses as an argument to the various functions in
the `Enum` module.

| Source | Num Of Lines<br/>(*.ex) | Num Of Results |
| :----: | ---------: | -----------: |
| Elixir |  128513    |    130       |
| Phoenix|  25596     |    19        |
|Livebook|  31928     |    40        |

##### Summarized

Here is my categorization of the main usages:

* Accessing data (structures)
  > `|> Enum.map(& &1.app)`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.sort_by(& &1.app)`
  > 
  > `|> map(&elem(&1, 0))`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.flat_map(&elem(&1, 1))`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.map(&Map.fetch!(acc, &1))`

* Building other data structures
  > `|> Enum.map(&{:line, &1})`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.map(&%{kind: :variable, name: &1})`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.map(&{&1, :included})`
    
* Calling functions with `arity/2` or greater
  > `|> Enum.map(&Path.join(prefix, &1))`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.map(&String.to_integer(&1, 16))`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.map(&Path.relative_to(&1, target))`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.map(&String.replace(&1, ~r/@(type|opaque) /, ""))`

* Filtering
  > `|> Enum.reject(&(&1 == []))`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.reject(&(&1 == ""))`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.filter(&(!File.dir?(&1)))`
    
* But there are some non-trivial ones
  > `to_lower_enc = &Enum.map(&1, fn c -> if c in ?A..?Z, do: c - ?A + ?a, else: c end)`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.map(&(&1 |> elem(0) |> String.length()))`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.map(&Task.async(fn -> consolidate(&1, paths, output, opts) end))`
  > 
  > `|> Enum.filter(&(not (File.dir?(&1) or compiled_file?(&1))))`

Overall, the use of `&` by Elixir experts seems limited to simple expressions.

#### Conclusion

The above gives us a great place to start:

> We should use the `&` operator when we have the need for a single
> expression to be evaluated and that expression is one of:
> 
>   1. Accessing a known key in a map/`%{}`
>   1. A single test for (in)equality
>   1. Creating a tuple/`{}`
>   1. Calling a single function with `arity/2` or greater where you know
>      the remaining arguments

But, as seen above, even in code bases of 10s of 1000s of lines of code,
a small fraction use this syntax.

So, your author does recommend its use in these cases but you shouldnt
find yourself writing a lot of them!

## Tags

Programming, Functions, Anonymous Functions, Elixir, &
